Blog: Why Cloud Engineers need Pulumi ESC (#13628)
pulumi/docs: content/blog/why-every-cloud-engineer-needs-pulumi-esc-secrets-management/index.md

# date/time.
date: 2024-01-07T17:28:56Z

# The draft setting determines whether a post is published. Set it to true if
# you want to be able to merge the post without publishing it.
draft: false

# Use the meta_desc property to provide a brief summary (one or two sentences)
# of the content of the post, which is useful for targeting search results or
# social-media previews. This field is required or the build will fail the
# linter test. Max length is 160 characters.
meta_desc: Simplify and secure Kubernetes and multi-cloud secrets with Pulumi ESC. Learn how it integrates with ESO and revolutionizes your cloud operations.

# The meta_image appears in social-media previews and on the blog home page. A
# placeholder image representing the recommended format, dimensions and aspect
# ratio has been provided for you.
meta_image: meta.png

# At least one author is required. The values in this list correspond with the
# `id` properties of the team member files at /data/team/team. Create a file for
# yourself if you don't already have one.
authors:
    - sara-huddleston

# At least one tag is required. Lowercase, hyphen-delimited is recommended.

> tags:
>     - change-me

Author: ```suggestion
tags:
    - security
    - esc
    - external-secrets-operator
    - kubernetes
    - secrets-management
```

#### Benefits of Using Pulumi ESC with ESO:

1. Centralized Storage: Store secrets securely in Pulumi ESC and synchronize them with Kubernetes across multiple clusters.
2. Dynamic Updates: Whenever a secret is updated in ESC, ESO automatically replicates the changes into Kubernetes, eliminating manual intervention.
3. Granular Management: Define which secrets are synchronized and to which namespaces, ensuring tight access controls and minimizing risk.
4. Automated Secret Rotation: By leveraging ESC's rotation capabilities, ESO ensures Kubernetes receives refreshed credentials without requiring downtime.

### Example Use Case

Consider a cloud engineer deploying an application in Kubernetes that requires database credentials. Instead of hardcoding these credentials, the engineer can:

1. Store them securely in Pulumi ESC.
2. Use ESO to sync the secrets into the Kubernetes cluster.
3. Access these secrets securely from within the application.

This approach not only boosts security but also ensures compliance with enterprise-grade standards.

## The Future of Secrets Management with Pulumi ESC

> Pulumi ESC is more than just a secrets management tool—it's the foundation of secure, scalable, and agile cloud operations. For cloud engineers grappling with multi-cloud complexity, Kubernetes deployments, and compliance concerns, it provides a streamlined, automated approach that enhances efficiency and security.

Author: ```suggestion
Pulumi ESC is more than just a secrets management tool — it's the foundation of secure, scalable, and agile cloud operations. For cloud engineers grappling with multi-cloud complexity, Kubernetes deployments, and compliance concerns, it provides a streamlined, automated approach that enhances efficiency and security.
```

---
title: "Why Every Cloud Engineer Needs Pulumi Esc for Secrets Management"
allow_long_title: true

# The date represents the post's publish date, and by default corresponds with
# the date and time this file was generated. Dates are used for display and
# ordering purposes only; they have no effect on whether or when a post is
# published. To influence the ordering of posts published on the same date, use
# the time portion of the date value; posts are sorted in descending order by

> # date/time.
> date: 2024-01-07T17:28:56Z

Author: ```suggestion
# date/time.
date: 2025-01-07T17:28:56Z
```

# yourself if you don't already have one.
authors:
    - sara-huddleston

# At least one tag is required. Lowercase, hyphen-delimited is recommended.
tags:
    - security
    - esc
    - external-secrets-operator
    - kubernetes
    - secrets-management

# The social copy used to promote this post on Twitter and Linkedin. These
# properties do not actually create the post and have no effect on the
# generated blog page. They are here strictly for reference.

# Here are some examples of posts we have made in the past for inspiration:
# https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7171191945841561601
# https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7169021002394296320
# https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7155606616455737345
# https://twitter.com/PulumiCorp/status/1763265391042654623
# https://twitter.com/PulumiCorp/status/1762900472489185492
# https://twitter.com/PulumiCorp/status/1755637618631405655

social:
    twitter:
    linkedin:

# See the blogging docs at https://github.com/pulumi/docs/blob/master/BLOGGING.md
# for details, and please remove these comments before submitting for review.
---

> Managing secrets is one of the most critical responsibilities in cloud engineering. Secrets like API keys, database credentials, and encryption tokens are the backbone of secure and seamless cloud operations. However, the complexity of modern cloud-native and multi-cloud environments has made traditional secrets management solutions inadequate. 

Reviewer: Can we talk about config too? All cloud engineers need config too, and we seem to forget that in every piece of content.

- Why Cloud Engineers Need Pulumi ESC
- The Future of Secrets Management with Pulumi ESC

## The Challenge of Secrets Management in Modern Cloud Environments

Secrets management has changed significantly over the past decade. Gone are the days when secrets could be manually maintained within static locations like configuration files or plain text databases. Nowadays, cloud environments demand a higher level of sophistication:

1. **Distributed Systems**: Even in multi-cloud and hybrid setups, secrets must be accessible across varied platforms without exposing vulnerabilities
2. **Dynamic Infrastructure**: Kubernetes, serverless architectures, and ephemeral environments must have secrets that adapt dynamically.
3. **Security Risks**: Hardcoded or poorly managed secrets can lead to catastrophic breaches, costing companies millions in data recovery and compliance penalties.
4. **Operational Burdens**: Manual secrets management is error-prone, inefficient, unscalable, and needs to align with DevOps and DevSecOps best practices.

Pulumi ESC addresses these issues head-on, redefining how cloud engineers manage secrets efficiently, securely, and at scale.

## What is Pulumi ESC?

> Pulumi ESC is a secrets management and orchestration service from Pulumi designed to secure sensitive configurations across modern cloud environments. It supports seamless integration, enabling engineers to:

Reviewer: We are not an orchestration service, but we are a "broker".

Author: @cleverguy25 "broker" doesn't sound as nice. Should we update the docs page too? At the bottom of https://www.pulumi.com/docs/esc/, in the "Why Pulumi ESC?" it says it is an orchestration service.

> Pulumi ESC is a secrets management and orchestration service from Pulumi designed to secure sensitive configurations across modern cloud environments. It supports seamless integration, enabling engineers to:

Author: ```suggestion
Pulumi ESC simplifies how organizations manage secrets and configurations. It is designed to secure sensitive configurations across modern cloud environments and supports seamless integration, enabling engineers to:
```

- Centrally manage secrets for applications and infrastructure.
- Synchronize secrets dynamically across Kubernetes and other environments with platforms like ESO.
- Implement automated secret rotation, ensuring compliance and minimizing vulnerabilities.
- Access secrets securely through Pulumi's SDKs, CLI, or API.
- 
Whether integrated with Pulumi's Infrastructure as Code (IaC) platform or used as a standalone service, Pulumi ESC enables cloud engineers to streamline secrets management with centralized control.

## Key Features of Pulumi ESC

### 1. Seamless Integration with External Platforms

Pulumi ESC integrates with popular secrets providers, including AWS Secrets Manager, Azure Key Vault, GCP Secret Manager, and HashiCorp Vault, making it adaptable for multi-cloud and hybrid cloud architectures.

### 2. Dynamic Secrets Synchronization with ESO

Partnering with the External Secrets Operator, Pulumi ESC synchronizes secrets securely into Kubernetes clusters. This eliminates hardcoding secrets into manifests or relying on unsecured manual processes.

### 3. Automated Rotation and Expiry

> Pulumi ESC minimizes security risks by automating the rotation of secrets. This feature aligns secrets management with CI/CD processes for cloud engineers focused on DevOps, ensuring credentials remain valid only when needed.

Reviewer: We actually do not do this, yet. It is on the roadmap

> ### 3. Automated Rotation and Expiry
> 
> Pulumi ESC minimizes security risks by automating the rotation of secrets. This feature aligns secrets management with CI/CD processes for cloud engineers focused on DevOps, ensuring credentials remain valid only when needed.

Author: ```suggestion
### 3. Safely Roll Back to a Previous Version

Pulumi ESC Versioning gives you unprecedented control over your secrets and configuration. Every change is captured in an immutable revision history, allowing you to audit modifications, compare versions, and safely roll back.
```

### 4. Secure by Design

> Pulumi ESC follows a "secure by default" model by employing encryption, fine-grained access control, and detailed audit trails. Engineers can meet compliance regulations effortlessly while gaining full visibility into secret access patterns.

Reviewer: I would not call our current access control fine grained, it is something we are working on.

> Pulumi ESC follows a "secure by default" model by employing encryption, fine-grained access control, and detailed audit trails. Engineers can meet compliance regulations effortlessly while gaining full visibility into secret access patterns.

Author: ```suggestion
Pulumi ESC follows a "secure by default" model, employing encryption, access control, and detailed audit trails. Engineers can meet compliance regulations effortlessly while gaining full visibility into secret access patterns.
```

### 5. Language Flexibility

> With SDKs available for Python, Go, JavaScript, and other major languages, cloud engineers can integrate Pulumi ESC directly into their CI/CD pipelines or custom applications.

Reviewer: We only support python, go, and javascript/typescript at the moment.

> With SDKs available for Python, Go, JavaScript, and other major languages, cloud engineers can integrate Pulumi ESC directly into their CI/CD pipelines or custom applications.

Author: ```suggestion
With SDKs available for Python, Go, JavaScript, and TypeScript, cloud engineers can integrate Pulumi ESC directly into their CI/CD pipelines or custom applications.
```

### Streamlined Multi-Cloud Management

Managing secrets across AWS, Azure, and GCP can quickly become chaotic. Pulumi ESC's cross-platform integration simplifies this process, ensuring engineers can manage and sync secrets from a single interface.

### Simplified Kubernetes Secrets

Kubernetes' default secrets offer limited security and scalability. Pulumi ESC with ESO overcomes these limitations by securely synchronizing and managing secrets within Kubernetes clusters. This prevents unauthorized access and provides automated updates.

### Zero Downtime Through Automation

Manual secrets management often leads to errors such as expired credentials or outdated tokens. Pulumi ESC automates the entire lifecycle of secrets—creation, rotation, replication, and expiry—guaranteeing uninterrupted services.

### Developer-Friendly Workflows

Tools should make engineers' lives easier, not harder. Pulumi ESC's CLI, SDKs, and API provide intuitive ways to integrate into existing workflows. For cloud engineers leveraging Infrastructure as Code with Pulumi, managing secrets alongside the stack becomes effortless.

> ### Using Pulumi ESC with External Secrets Operator (ESO)

Reviewer: While we should mention ESO, we should also wait and mention the upcoming CSI provider.

Author: When will the upcoming CSI provider be released?

# date/time.
date: 2024-01-07T17:28:56Z

# The draft setting determines whether a post is published. Set it to true if
# you want to be able to merge the post without publishing it.
draft: false

# Use the meta_desc property to provide a brief summary (one or two sentences)
# of the content of the post, which is useful for targeting search results or
# social-media previews. This field is required or the build will fail the
# linter test. Max length is 160 characters.
meta_desc: Simplify and secure Kubernetes and multi-cloud secrets with Pulumi ESC. Learn how it integrates with ESO and revolutionizes your cloud operations.

# The meta_image appears in social-media previews and on the blog home page. A
# placeholder image representing the recommended format, dimensions and aspect
# ratio has been provided for you.
meta_image: meta.png

# At least one author is required. The values in this list correspond with the
# `id` properties of the team member files at /data/team/team. Create a file for
# yourself if you don't already have one.
authors:
    - sara-huddleston

# At least one tag is required. Lowercase, hyphen-delimited is recommended.

> tags:
>     - security
>     - esc
>     - external-secrets-operator
>     - kubernetes
>     - secrets-management
> 
> 

Author: ```suggestion
tags:
    - security
    - esc
    - external-secrets-operator
    - kubernetes
    - secrets-management

```

---

> title: "Why Every Cloud Engineer Needs Pulumi Esc for Secrets Management"

Author: ```suggestion
title: "Why Every Cloud Engineer Needs Pulumi ESC for Secrets Management"
```

### 4. Secure by Design

Pulumi ESC follows a "secure by default" model, employing encryption, access control, and detailed audit trails. Engineers can meet compliance regulations effortlessly while gaining full visibility into secret access patterns.

### 5. Configuration-as-Code, Automation, and Integration Everywhere

Pulumi ESC embraces an "as-code" approach, enabling configuration and secrets management using TypeScript, JavaScript, Go, Python, or YAML. The 'esc' CLI and API support automation in CI/CD environments, reducing credential duplication and ensuring a single source of truth.

### 6. Dev Tools Integrations

Pulumi ESC’s metadata and support for popular configuration formats enable seamless integration with tools like Direnv, Docker, and GitHub, allowing easy management of environment variables, secrets, and configurations.

### 7. Infrastructure Tools Integrations

Pulumi ESC extends its capabilities beyond Pulumi IaC by integrating with other infrastructure tools such as Cloudflare, Terraform, and OpenTofu. These integrations enable seamless provisioning of cloud credentials and input variables directly from ESC environments.

> ## Why Cloud Engineers Need Pulumi ESC

Author: Note to self: add a conf-specific point

### Enhanced Security and Compliance

Cloud engineers often have to balance security and operations. Pulumi ESC centralizes secrets in a secure vault, ensuring encrypted storage, access control, and audit visibility. It also complies with industry standards like SOC 2, PCI-DSS, and GDPR.

### Streamlined Multi-Cloud Management

Managing secrets across AWS, Azure, and GCP can quickly become chaotic. Pulumi ESC's cross-platform integration simplifies this process, ensuring engineers can manage and sync secrets from a single interface.

### Simplified Kubernetes Secrets

Kubernetes' default secrets offer limited security and scalability. Pulumi ESC with ESO overcomes these limitations by securely synchronizing and managing secrets within Kubernetes clusters. This prevents unauthorized access and provides automated updates.

### Zero Downtime Through Automation

> Manual secrets management often leads to errors such as expired credentials or outdated tokens. Pulumi ESC automates the entire lifecycle of secrets—creation, rotation, replication, and expiry—guaranteeing uninterrupted services.

Author: Note to self: we can't claim this yet... rotation not available yet, check others.

---
title: "Why Every Cloud Engineer Needs Pulumi ESC for Secrets Management"
allow_long_title: true

# The date represents the post's publish date, and by default corresponds with
# the date and time this file was generated. Dates are used for display and
# ordering purposes only; they have no effect on whether or when a post is
# published. To influence the ordering of posts published on the same date, use
# the time portion of the date value; posts are sorted in descending order by
# date/time.
date: 2025-03-18T07:28:56Z

# The draft setting determines whether a post is published. Set it to true if
# you want to be able to merge the post without publishing it.
draft: false

# Use the meta_desc property to provide a brief summary (one or two sentences)
# of the content of the post, which is useful for targeting search results or
# social-media previews. This field is required or the build will fail the
# linter test. Max length is 160 characters.

> meta_desc: Simplify and secure Kubernetes and multi-cloud secrets with Pulumi ESC. Learn how it integrates with ESO and revolutionizes your cloud operations.

Author: ```suggestion
meta_desc: Managing secrets in the cloud is harder than ever. Learn how cloud engineers can streamline security, eliminate risks, and simplify secrets management at scale.
```

# The meta_image appears in social-media previews and on the blog home page. A
# placeholder image representing the recommended format, dimensions and aspect
# ratio has been provided for you.

> meta_image: meta.png

Author: ```suggestion
meta_image: pulumi-esc-quote.png
```

---
title: "Why Every Cloud Engineer Needs Pulumi ESC for Secrets Management"
allow_long_title: true

# The date represents the post's publish date, and by default corresponds with
# the date and time this file was generated. Dates are used for display and
# ordering purposes only; they have no effect on whether or when a post is
# published. To influence the ordering of posts published on the same date, use
# the time portion of the date value; posts are sorted in descending order by
# date/time.

> date: 2025-03-18T07:28:56Z

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2025-03-17T07:28:56Z
```

# properties do not actually create the post and have no effect on the
# generated blog page. They are here strictly for reference.

# Here are some examples of posts we have made in the past for inspiration:
# https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7171191945841561601
# https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7169021002394296320
# https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7155606616455737345
# https://twitter.com/PulumiCorp/status/1763265391042654623
# https://twitter.com/PulumiCorp/status/1762900472489185492
# https://twitter.com/PulumiCorp/status/1755637618631405655

social:
    twitter:
    linkedin:

# See the blogging docs at https://github.com/pulumi/docs/blob/master/BLOGGING.md
# for details, and please remove these comments before submitting for review.
---

Managing secrets is one of the most critical responsibilities in cloud engineering. Secrets like API keys, database credentials, and encryption tokens are the backbone of secure and seamless cloud operations. However, the complexity of modern cloud-native and multi-cloud environments has made traditional secrets management solutions inadequate. 

> Enter **Pulumi ESC (Environments, Secrets, and Configuration)**—a breakthrough in taming secrets sprawl and streamlining configuration management across infrastructure. Let's explore why Pulumi ESC is a necessity for cloud engineers, its seamless integration with the External Secrets Operator (ESO), and the practical applications that make it the ultimate solution for modern secrets management.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enter **Pulumi ESC (Environments, Secrets, and Configuration)**—a breakthrough in taming secrets sprawl and streamlining configuration management across infrastructure. Let's explore why Pulumi ESC is a necessity for cloud engineers, helping make secrets management secure while keeping it simple.
```

<!--more-->

## In this article:

- [The Challenge of Secrets Management in Modern Cloud Environments](/blog/why-every-cloud-engineer-needs-pulumi-esc-secrets-management/#the-challenge-of-secrets-management-in-modern-cloud-environments)
- [What is Pulumi ESC](/blog/why-every-cloud-engineer-needs-pulumi-esc-secrets-management/#what-is-pulumi-esc)
- [Key Features of Pulumi ESC](/blog/why-every-cloud-engineer-needs-pulumi-esc-secrets-management/#key-features-of-pulumi-esc)
- [Why Cloud Engineers Need Pulumi ESC](/blog/why-every-cloud-engineer-needs-pulumi-esc-secrets-management/#why-cloud-engineers-need-pulumi-esc)
- [The Future of Secrets Management with Pulumi ESC](/blog/why-every-cloud-engineer-needs-pulumi-esc-secrets-management/#the-future-of-secrets-management-with-pulumi-esc)

## The Challenge of Secrets Management in Modern Cloud Environments

> Secrets management has changed significantly over the past decade. Gone are the days when secrets could be manually maintained within static locations like configuration files or plain text databases. Nowadays, cloud environments demand a higher level of sophistication:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Secrets management has changed significantly over the past decade. Gone are the days when secrets could be hardcoded, manually maintained in static configuration files, or left floating around in plaintext on dev machines. Nowadays, cloud environments demand a higher level of sophistication:
```

> 1. **Distributed Systems**: Even in multi-cloud and hybrid setups, secrets must be accessible across varied platforms without exposing vulnerabilities

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Distributed Systems**: Even in multi-cloud and hybrid setups, secrets must be accessible across varied platforms without exposing vulnerabilities.
```

4. **Operational Burdens**: Manual secrets management is error-prone, inefficient, unscalable, and needs to align with DevOps and DevSecOps best practices.

Pulumi ESC addresses these issues head-on, redefining how cloud engineers manage secrets efficiently, securely, and at scale.

{{% notes type="tip" %}}
Jk Jensen, Team Lead at Mysten Labs, said:

"*Pulumi ESC has been a lifesaver for us. It’s nice to throw everything behind an ESC environment and eliminate one-off granting/IAM permissions and other issues related to static credentials. It gives us peace of mind knowing that we can grant permissions quickly and revoke easily limiting blast radius for any access.*"
{{% /notes %}}

## What is Pulumi ESC?

Pulumi ESC simplifies how organizations manage secrets and configurations. It is designed to secure sensitive configurations across modern cloud environments and supports seamless integration, enabling engineers to:

- **Access, share, and manage** secrets, passwords, API keys, and configuration settings like network and deployment options.

> - **Synchronize secrets and configuration** from any store to any app, tool, or CI/CD platform.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Synchronize secrets and configuration** from any secrets manager to any app, tool, or CI/CD platform.
```

### Developer-Friendly Workflows

Tools should make engineers' lives easier, not harder. Pulumi ESC's CLI, SDKs, and API provide intuitive ways to integrate into existing workflows. For cloud engineers leveraging Infrastructure as Code with Pulumi, managing secrets alongside the stack becomes effortless.

{{% notes type="tip" %}}
Thomas Meckel, Senior Cloud Architect at Ophios GmbH, explains:

"*Pulumi's built-in encryption of secrets sets it apart as a leader in secure infrastructure management. Unlike other tools that leave sensitive data exposed or require complex configurations, Pulumi ensures secrets are encrypted by default, leveraging flexible options like Azure Key Vault or AWS KMS. This eliminates the risk of plaintext exposure and simplifies secure deployments. For any organization serious about cloud security, Pulumi's approach to secrets management is a critical differentiator, combining ease of use with robust protection against breaches.*"
{{% /notes %}}

> ### Kubernetes Integration with External Secrets Operator (ESO) and Secrets Store CSI Driver

Author: ```suggestion
### Kubernetes Secrets Management
```
